---
layout: post
title: "Pfsense Firewall Deployment -- Home Lab Environment for penetration and malware development"
date: 2026-03-17 03:34:00 +00:00
excerpt: "Complete Pfsense guidelines, framework, and overall outline on zero => working, edge firewall appliance"
categories: [homelab, firewall]
tags: [networking]
image: /assets/images/pfsense.png
---

Installation overview on pfsense:

—-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
## Executive Summary: 

For our IA462 class, we have been tasked with the assignment to provide an overview regarding the installation process, and configuration requirements for deploying a pfsense firewall appliance. Below, I will include step by step documentation to guide users on how to install and setup pfsense, and any necessary troubleshooting remarks surrounding the process as well. Specific configuration details this document will cover include installing and writing the pfsense 2.7.2 ISO file to external media, pfsense installation, formatting, and setup requirements, console configuration, web-application management, and assigning IP address ranges, and interfaces (WAN, LAN, DMZ). Overall, this document aims to aid others reading with the process of deploying a basic edge firewall appliance within their network, and offer additional oversight on how to properly ensure their firewall appliance is managed and provisioned properly in order to maintain seamless up time, usage, and operability. This report is correlated to IA 462’s “Build a Firewall” assignment, option one.


## Prerequisites:

General internet connection from host device, either physically with an ethernet connection, or using wireless LAN / WAN.
Physical or remote system to host the operating system on, within our lab environment. This may include hosting our pfsense router within a hypervisor, such as Proxmox, or Hyper-V as well. 
Pfsense 2.7.2 ISO file, flashing software (DD / Etcher / Rufus), and disk utility software (Disk Management, Gparted, Gnome-Disks, Device Manager) . 
Three physical or virtual NICS for our pfsense firewall to use
If using a remote hypervisor to simulate a lab environment (e.g. a remote server), we must ensure stable internet connectivity from both the client and the server (ports being open and accessible), and that VPN access works properly to access our lab. This may include installing and trusting a CA file to use with a VPN. 


## Summary of Document:

Install pfsense ISO, and flash it onto external media
Create VM if using one for pfsense, or prepare host system for OS installation.
Configure proper NICS, SCSI ports, and other hardware specifications (Virtualization dependent)
Plug in external media (physical access to host device), and or re-configure hardware's boot priority to ensure pfsense media boots before hard disk / PXE boot. This may also include re-working a hypervisors VM configuration settings, relative to what software is being used.
Boot into pfsense firewall OS and start installing pfsense
Accept EULA, and assign both WAN, and LAN interfaces to respective NICS. Additionally pick out keyboard layout if needed (US)
Proceed with default pfsense partitioning scheme, AKA Auto ZFS or UFS
Within ZFS / UFS configuration options, keep defaults unless necessary changes are needed. For redundancy, select the respective RAIDz option according to how many disks are included within the pfsense host device. 
Select host disk to install pfsense on
Allow checksum verification and installation proceeds to complete, and allow the pfsense console to pop up / initialize
Assign interfaces to mapped out network topology configurations, set-up default VLAN options if needed as well. Also, statically input in all WAN, LAN, and OPT1 address spacing needs depending on subnetting within your lab environment through the pfsense console options. 
Ensure WAN default gateway, and LAN default gateways are properly set up within the pfsense console, changes are saved, and that DHCP is enabled on the subnet needed to configure pfsense. You could also ping devices to ensure connectivity.
Connect to the pfsense admin panel from the client within the pfsense network, change default credentials, and provision the network.

—-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
## Hardware Requirements: 

** Simply put, we cannot start the process of installing any operating system on hardware before ensuring that we have the right specifications to facilitate outcoming or incoming connections, and handling end devices with our firewall. ** Reported from the manufacturer website, requirements for hosting the pfsense community edition OS is as follows: 

* 64-bit amd64 (x86-64) compatible CPU1GB or more RAM
* 8 GB or larger disk drive (SSD, HDD, etc.)
* One or more compatible network interface cards
* Bootable USB drive or high capacity optical drive (DVD or BD) for initial installation
* (NegateDocs., 2025.).
* For our networking needs, we must implement at least two NICS for our installation of pfsense, for provisioning two different LAN’s.
* Moreover, in this overview, I am using pfsense version 2.7.2+ in our network for installation purposes. If any additional insight is needed for versioning compatibility, consult the official Negate documentation at Pfsense-Image-Releases  

—-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

##2) Downloading and ‘Flashing’ Pfsense (Physical):

Secondly, in order to actually utilize the amazing toolkit pfsense offers, we must actually download the pfsense ISO file from the official website via Negate, and use tools mentioned below to flash the ISO file onto external media we own. If we are using a remote directory for pooling and obtaining an ISO with Proxmox, related image media may be included there, and this portion of the document may be skipped.

Requirements: 

1GB+ USB drive, or alternative external media. Storage size for a pfsense ISO file is around 500-800 MB depending if the file is compressed or not.
A tool to flash the ISO file on the external media device on a separate device. Tools that may offer services such as flashing include Rufus, VentoyUSB, and the DD tool on linux.


In this document, I will be covering tools Rufus (Windows), and DD (Linux) for burning our ISO file to our external media. To install pfsense, we must firstly navigate to https://www.pfsense.org/download/, select the specific version of pfsense needed, and then select the “download” button. This will redirect us to the Negate installation page, where we can specify how we want to install the medium. Keep in mind, you must create a Negate account in order to actually install the disk image. In the included picture below, I will show an example as to how we should install pfsense:
  (Helping Ninja., 2023).
Version: Version of latest pfsense ISO to download
Architecture: Select the x64 (AMD64) option if your CPU that will run on pfsense, uses a 64-Bit architecture CPU (most likely). Otherwise, select the respective x86 version for pfsense; (Netgate ADI).
Installer: USB Memstick for our external media. DVD installation methods are usually outdated, so we can ignore this option if using any modern storage device.
Console: VGA for non-physical (Serial  cable) related connections to actually interact with the pfsense UI.
Mirror: Choose a mirror closest to your geographical location


After finalizing the download, and ensuring the pfsense image installed fully, we should now verify the disk image installer with the respective hash signature provided from the negate docs. This step is highly recommended, as a unique digital hash signatures verification provides integrity in the file not having been changed since it has been released, enforcing the fact that it had not been tampered with, or modified during transit or installation. To compare checksums against the pfsenses official installer hash, check pfsense-Checksums. To compare checksums (SHA256 in this example), we can use tools provided on Windows, such as HashMyFiles to check a file's signature, or use the sha256sum (with optional argument -c) command on Linux and compare signatures against one-another.  


Now, we can initiate the flashing process, with either tool recommended below depending on your host operating system:
NOTE: The official docs provided via Negate recommend using Etcher, however any of the alternative tools mentioned below will serve as adequate solutions as well (NegateDocs., 2025)

## Linux (CLI / DD): 
- 1) Plug external media into host device
- 2) Find partition represented via your external media (lsblk -l -f)
- 3) Backup, and unmount the specific partitions data before flashing any ISO onto your disk, as we will be removing all data from the selected external media momentarily
- 4) Locate where your installed image is on the host disk. If this image is compressed, we would need to un-compress it with its respective format (e.g. gunzip -c <pfsense file> for a gz compressed zip file).
- 5) Finally, use the command sudo dd if=/location/of/iso of=/dev/sda bs=4m status=progress (optional) to flash the image onto the external media. Note that the /dev/sda would be the specific partition your media is recognized as (Ask Ubuntu., 2014). For any additional information regarding the dd tool, use command “man dd” to find more insight into usage and parameters.
#6) We are now ready to utilize our external media to boot into, and install the pfsense operating system! We can optionally check to see if our media is recognized as a type ISO, by using the file command (Linux) on our associated partition.

```bash
# Commands for Ease of Use:

curl -O <https://link/to/pfsense/iso
lsblk -f -l && mount | grep -iw "/dev/sd"
##if external media is mounted:
sudo umount /dev/sd<drive-letter>

#wipe fs (optional to clear disk) then run dd to flash iso
sudo wipefs -a /dev/sdX
sudo dd if=/location/of/iso of=/dev/sda bs=4m status=progress

```


## Windows (Rufus // GUI):
- 1) Plug external media into host device
- 2) Locate the partition source from using the Disk Management Tool on windows. You can search for this tool using the “type to search” feature on windows, and type “partition.”

   (Example result within the tool mentioned above)
- 3) Backup, and unmount the specific partitions data before flashing any ISO onto your disk, as we will be removing all data from the selected external media momentarily
- 4) If the downloaded image from pfsense is in fact compressed, we do not need to unzip it, as Rufus handles this for us.
- 5) Navigate to the installation page for Rufus, and install + open the tool. We should be able to select both our usb device, and ISO to install within the Rufus tool itself. Ensure to select “ok” if any warnings surrounding the image pop up: 

(Peter Tech., 2025). 
Note: Our image writing scheme must be type “dd” as rufus mentions above.
Note: Ensure to keep selected partition scheme, and file system options as how they are normally selected by default

- 6) After the writing has finished, you should receive a notification from Rufus. This indication means you are now ready to use this external media to flash pfsense to another device! 
By now, we can eject, and then insert our storage device into the physical, host machine pfsense will run on. Depending on model, and end device type, 


## Troubleshooting: 

We cannot just download the ISO file from the website provided, and copy + paste it into our USB directory, as this is not how flashing an ISO file works.
Pfsense image files must be flashed with DD mode, even on GUI instated tools (Tools should automatically detect this). 
Ensure your host device has a consistent & working network connection.
If flashing the media fails for any reason, ensure the usb device has been properly wiped, unmounted, and is being recognized by your host operating system accordingly. Depending on the OS, you could check hardware operability with either checking the Disk Management utility & Device Manager on Windows, and or running the commands lsblk -l -f, blkid,  fdisk -l, and mount on Linux to gain a better oversight on disk health. For more information, look into the resources provided below:
Windows: https://support.microsoft.com/en-us/topic/use-the-system-file-checker-tool-to-repair-missing-or-corrupted-system-files-79aa86cb-ca52-166a-92a3-966e85d4094e 
Linux: https://man.archlinux.org/man/ntfsfix.8.en  | https://www.man7.org/linux/man-pages/man8/fsck.8.html 
—-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
## Configuring our VM for installation (Virtual) :

In any case where we are building out our isolated firewall / network environment within a hypervisor, we can instead start deploying and structuring our pfsense’s hardware. Below, a series of images will provide guidance on how to allocate resources from our host OS to our Pfsense node.

Proxmox VM pfsense hardware configuration example:

Three NICS; Different VlanTags & Physical addresses
Virtio-GPU (Generic, VNC / Spice virtualization module)
Installation medium prioritized


## Proxmox VM hardware options for pfsense:



Keep in mind, when utilizing pfsense as a client, we may only have access to manipulate certain resources hosted via the hypervisor itself, and bridges (NICS bridged to backend connectivity) may not be one of them. To work around this, we can use VLAN segmentation to separate client end devices traffic, as shown:

NOTE: Even if using the same network bridge, our three attached NICS can still have different MAC addressees, and VLAN tags to register and navigate traffic accordingly

Example VLAN tag setup on client device (Attached to simulated subnet two, VLAN 1220):





## Troubleshooting:
For connecting to a VM’s console, ensure type Spice, or VNC is selected accordingly per user preference. Proxmox utilizes a 












## References:

NegateDocs., (Aug 26, 2025). | Hardware — Minimum Hardware Requirements.  pfSense Documentation.  Docs.netgate.com. https://docs.netgate.com/pfsense/en/latest/hardware/minimum-requirements.html 
Helping Ninja. (2023, September 6). How To Install pfSense + Beginners Configuration Guide. YouTube. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wUD1ZjPb4kw 
Peter Tech. (2025, February 27). How To Install pfSense With Rufus On Proxmox. YouTube. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5NQMXYM6X64 
 Netgate.com., (2025). | Prepare a USB Memstick  pfSense Documentation. https://docs.netgate.com/pfsense/en/latest/install/write-memstick.html 
Ask Ubuntu. (2014, August 16). Using “dd” command to create bootable USB stick. Ask Ubuntu. https://askubuntu.com/questions/512059/using-dd-command-to-create-bootable-usb-stick 
